docs/contrib.md, before:

# Contributing

Please see [Installation](install.md) for instructions on how to set up your development environment.

## Running the tests

We use `pytest` for testing. To run the tests, simply run:

```bash
pytest
```

or for a specific test file with the `-s` flag to show the output of the program:

```bash
pytest -s tests/test_program.py
```

lots of tests contains pretty printing of the IR themselves, so it's useful to see the output.

## Code style

We use `black` for code formatting. Besides the linter requirements, we also require the following
good-to-have practices:

### Naming

- try not to use abbreviation as names, unless it's a common abbreviation like `idx` for `index`
- try not create a lot of duplicated name prefix, e.g `ConstantInt` and `ConstantFloat`, instead use a new module to group them.
- try to use `snake_case` for naming variables and functions, and `CamelCase` for classes.

### Comments

- try not to write comments, unless it's really necessary. The code should be self-explanatory.
- if you have to write comments, try to use `NOTE:`, `TODO:` `FIXME:` tags to make it easier to search for them.

## Documentation

We use `just` for mangaging command line tools and scripts. It should be installed when you run `uv sync`. To build the documentation, simply run:

```bash
just doc
```

This will launch a local server to preview the documentation. You can also run `just doc-build` to build the documentation without launching the server.

## License

By contributing to this project, you agree to license your contributions under the Apache License 2.0 with LLVM Exceptions.

Commit message:

sketch some big sections for documentation (#160)

docs/contrib.md, after:

# Contributing

Please see [Installation](install.md) for instructions on how to set up your development environment.

## Pre-commit hooks

We use `pre-commit` to run the linter checks before you commit your changes. The pre-commit hooks are installed as part of the development dependencies. You can setup `pre-commit` using the following command:

```bash
pre-commit install
```

This will run the linter checks before you commit your changes. If the checks fail, the commit will be
rejected. Most of the following sections can be checked by the pre-commit hooks.

## Running the tests

We use `pytest` for testing. To run the tests, simply run:

```bash
pytest
```

or for a specific test file with the `-s` flag to show the output of the program:

```bash
pytest -s tests/test_program.py
```

lots of tests contains pretty printing of the IR themselves, so it's useful to see the output.

## Code style

We use `black` for code formatting. Besides the linter requirements, we also require the following
good-to-have practices:

### Naming

- try not to use abbreviation as names, unless it's a common abbreviation like `idx` for `index`
- try not create a lot of duplicated name prefix unless the extra information is necessary when accessing the class object.
- try to use `snake_case` for naming variables and functions, and `CamelCase` for classes.

### Comments

- try not to write comments, unless it's really necessary. The code should be self-explanatory.
- if you have to write comments, try to use `NOTE:`, `TODO:` `FIXME:` tags to make it easier to search for them.

## Documentation

We use `just` for mangaging command line tools and scripts. It should be installed when you run `uv sync`. To build the documentation, simply run:

```bash
just doc
```

This will launch a local server to preview the documentation. You can also run `just doc-build` to build the documentation without launching the server.

## License

By contributing to this project, you agree to license your contributions under the Apache License 2.0 with LLVM Exceptions.
