docs/index.md, before:

# Kirin

Kirin is the *K*ernel *I*ntermediate *R*epresentation *In*frastructure. It is a compiler
infrastructure for building compilers for domain-specific languages (DSLs) that target
scientific computing kernels.

## Features

- MLIR-like dialects as composable python packages
- Generated Python frontend for your DSLs
- Pythonic API for building compiler passes
- Julia-like abstract interpretation framework
- Builtin support for interpretation
- Builtin support Python type system and type inference
- Type hinted via modern Python type hints (you get all the auto-completes as you expect!)

## Kirin's mission

Compiler toolchain for scientists. Scientists are building domain-specific languages (DSLs) for
scientific purposes. Most scientists do not have any compiler engineering background. On the other hand,
these DSLs are often high-level, and their instructions are usually slower than the low-level instructions
and thus result in smaller programs. No need to generate high quality LLVM IR/native binary most of the time!
So there are some chances to simplify terminologies, interfaces for the none-pros, while allowing good
interactivity and fast prototyping.

For the interested, please read the [Kirin's Mission](blog/2024/11/11/kirins-mission/) blog post for more details.

## Acknowledgement

While the mission and audience may be very different, Kirin has been deeply inspired by a few projects:

- [MLIR](https://mlir.llvm.org/), the concept of dialects and the way it is designed.
- [xDSL](https://github.com/xdslproject/xdsl), about how IR data structure & interpreter should be designed in Python.
- [Julia](https://julialang.org/), abstract interpretation, and certain design choices for scientific community.
- [JAX](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) and [numbda](https://numba.pydata.org/), the frontend syntax and the way it is designed.
- [Symbolics.jl](https://github.com/JuliaSymbolics/Symbolics.jl) and its predecessors, the design of rule-based rewriter.

## Quick Example: the `beer` language

In this example, we will mutate python's semantics to
support a small eDSL (embedded domain-specific language) called `beer`.
It describes the process of brewing beer and get drunk.

Before we start, let's sketch an example of the `beer` language:

```python
@beer
def main(x):
    beer = NewBeer("budlight") # (1)!
    Pour(beer, 12) # (2)!
    Drink(beer) # (3)!
    Puke() # (4)!
    if x > 1: # (5)!
        Drink(NewBeer("heineken")) # (6)!
    else:
        Drink(NewBeer("tsingdao")) # (7)!
    return x + 1 # (8)!
```

1. The `NewBeer` statement creates a new beer object with a given brand.
2. The `Pour` statement pours a beer object.
3. The `Drink` statement drinks a beer object.
4. The `Puke` statement pukes. Now we are drunk!
5. Instead of a normal `if else` branching statement, we execute the branches randomly because we are drunk.
6. The `Drink` statement drinks a `heineken` beer object for some possibility.
7. The `Drink` statement drinks a `tsingdao` beer object for some possibility.
8. Doing some math to get a result.

The beer language is wrapped with a decorator `@beer` to indicate that the function is written in the `beer` language instead of normal Python. (think about how would you program GPU kernels in Python, or how would you use `jax.jit` and `numba.jit` decorators).

### Defining the dialect

First, let's define the [dialect](def.md#dialects) object, which is a registry for all
the objects modeling the semantics.

```python
from kirin import ir

dialect = ir.Dialect("beer")
```

### Defining the statements

Next, we want to define a runtime value `Beer` for the `beer` language so that we may use
later in our interpreter. This is just a standard Python `dataclass`.

```python
from dataclasses import dataclass

@dataclass
class Beer:
    brand: str
```

Now, we can define the `beer` language's [statements](def.md#statements).

```python
from kirin.decl import statement, info
from kirin.dialects.py import types

@statement(dialect=dialect)
class NewBeer(Statement):
    name = "new_beer" # (1)!
    traits = frozenset({ir.Pure()}) # (2)!
    brand: ir.SSAValue = info.argument(types.String) # (3)!
    result: ir.ResultValue = info.result(types.PyClass(Beer)) # (4)!
```

1. The `name` field specifies the name of the statement in the IR text format (e.g printing).
2. The `traits` field specifies the statement's traits, in this case, it is a
   [pure function](101.md/#what-is-purity) because each brand name uniquely identifies a
   beer object.
3. The `brand` field specifies the argument of the statement. It is a string value. The arguments
   of a [`Statement`](def.md#statements) must be [`ir.SSAValue`](def.md#ssa-values) objects with a
   field specifier `info.argument` that optionally specifies the type of the argument. The type used
   here is `types.String` which is not Python's type but a [`TypeAttribute`](def.md#attributes) object
   from the `py.types` dialect.
4. The `result` field specifies the result of the statement. Usually a statement only has one result
   value. The type of the result must be [`ir.ResultValue`](def.md#ssa-values) with a field specifier
    `info.result` that optionally specifies the type of the result.

the `NewBeer` statement creates a new beer object with a given brand. Thus
it takes a string as an argument and returns a `Beer` object. Click the plus sign above
to see the corresponding explanation.

```python
@statement(dialect=dialect)
class Drink(Statement):
    name = "drink"
    beverage: ir.SSAValue = info.argument(types.PyClass(Beer))
```

Similarly, we define `Drink` statement that takes a `Beer` object as an argument. The `types.PyClass` type
from `py.type` dialect understands Python classes and can take a Python class as an argument to create a
type attribute.

```python
@statement(dialect=dialect)
class Pour(Statement):
    name = "pour"
    beverage: ir.SSAValue = info.argument(types.PyClass(Beer))
    amount: ir.SSAValue = info.argument(types.Int)
```

The `Pour` statement takes a `Beer` object and an integer amount as arguments. The `types.Int` type is
from the `py.types` dialect. Now we can define a more complicated statement that involves control flow.

```python
@statement(dialect=dialect)
class RandomBranch(Statement):
    name = "random_br"
    traits = frozenset({IsTerminator()}) # (1)!
    cond: SSAValue = info.argument(types.Bool) # (2)!
    then_arguments: tuple[ir.SSAValue, ...] = info.argument() # (3)!
    else_arguments: tuple[ir.SSAValue, ...] = info.argument() # (4)!
    then_successor: ir.Block = info.block() # (5)!
    else_successor: ir.Block = info.block() # (6)!
```

1. The `traits` field specifies that this statement is a terminator. A terminator is a statement that
   ends a block. In this case, the `RandomBranch` statement is a terminator because it decides which
   block to go next.
2. The `cond` field specifies the condition of the branch. It is a boolean value.
3. The `then_arguments` field specifies the arguments that are passed to the `then_successor` block. Unlike
   previous examples, the `then_arguments` field is annotated with `tuple[ir.SSAValue, ...]`, which means
   it takes a tuple of `ir.SSAValue` objects (like what it means in a `dataclass`).
4. The `else_arguments` field specifies the arguments that are passed to the `else_successor` block.
5. The `then_successor` field specifies the block that the control flow goes to if the condition is true.
6. The `else_successor` field specifies the block that the control flow goes to if the condition is false.

the `RandomBranch` statement is a terminator that takes a boolean condition and two tuples of arguments. However,
unlike a normal `if else` branching statement, it does not execute the branches based on the condition. Instead,
it randomly chooses one of the branches to execute.

### Defining the interpreter

Now with the statements defined, we can define how to interpret them

```python
from kirin.interp import DialectInterpreter, Interpreter, ResultValue, Successor, impl

@dialect.register
class BeerInterpreter(DialectInterpreter):
    ...
```

the `BeerInterpreter` class is a subclass of `DialectInterpreter` that registers the implementation
of each implementation. The implementation is a method decorated with `@impl` that executes the
statement.

```python
    @impl(NewBeer)
    def new_beer(self, interp: Interpreter, stmt: NewBeer, values: tuple):
        return ResultValue(Beer(values[0]))

    @impl(Drink)
    def drink(self, interp: Interpreter, stmt: Drink, values: tuple):
        print(f"Drinking {values[0].brand}")
        return ResultValue()

    @impl(Pour)
    def pour(self, interp: Interpreter, stmt: Pour, values: tuple):
        print(f"Pouring {values[0].brand} {values[1]}")
        return ResultValue()

    @impl(Puke)
    def puke(self, interp: Interpreter, stmt: Puke, values: tuple):
        print("Puking!!!")
        return ResultValue()
```

Normally, most implementations are just straightforward like the above except that they will
do more meaningful things than printing. The [`ResultValue`][kirin.interp.ResultValue] object is
a result type of the interpreter that saying the return value is just a normal tuple of values.
This will be different when we implement interpretation for a terminator:

```python
    @impl(RandomBranch)
    def random_branch(self, interp: Interpreter, stmt: RandomBranch, values: tuple):
        frame = interp.state.current_frame()
        if randint(0, 1):
            return Successor(
                stmt.then_successor, *frame.get_values(stmt.then_arguments)
            )
        else:
            return Successor(
                stmt.else_successor, *frame.get_values(stmt.then_arguments)
            )
```

The `random_branch` implementation randomly chooses one of the branches to execute. The return value
is a [`Successor`][kirin.interp.Successor] object that specifies the next block to execute and the arguments
to pass to the block.

### Rewrite Python `if else` statement to `RandomBranch`

Now we can define a rewrite pass that rewrites Python `if else` statement to `RandomBranch` statement.
This is done by defining a subclass of [`RewriteRule`][kirin.rewrite.RewriteRule] and implementing the
`rewrite_Statement` method. The `RewriteRule` class is a standard Python visitor on Kirin's IR.

Here, we only need to implement the `rewrite_Statement` method to rewrite the `if else` statement to `RandomBranch`.

```python
from kirin.dialects import cf # (1)!
from kirin.rewrite import RewriteResult, RewriteRule # (2)!

@dataclass
class RewriteToRandomBranch(RewriteRule):

    def rewrite_Statement(self, node: ir.Statement) -> RewriteResult: # (3)!
        if not isinstance(node, cf.ConditionalBranch): # (4)!
            return RewriteResult()
        node.replace_by(
            RandomBranch(
                cond=node.cond,
                then_arguments=node.then_arguments,
                then_successor=node.then_successor,
                else_arguments=node.else_arguments,
                else_successor=node.else_successor,
            )
        )
        return RewriteResult(has_done_something=True) # (5)!
```

1. Import the control flow dialect `cf` which is what Python `if else` statement compiles to by default in the `basic` dialect group.
2. Import the `RewriteRule` class from the `rewrite` module.
3. This is the signature of `rewrite_Statement` method. Your IDE should hint you the type signature so you can auto-complete it.
4. Check if the statement is a `ConditionalBranch` statement. If it is not, return an empty `RewriteResult`.
5. Replace the `ConditionalBranch` statement with a `RandomBranch` statement and return a `RewriteResult` that indicates the rewrite has been done. Every statement has a [`replace_by`][kirin.ir.Statement.replace_by] method that replaces the statement with another statement.

### Putting everything together

Now we can put everything together and finally create the `beer` decorator, and
you do not need to figure out the complicated type hinting and decorator implementation
because Kirin will do it for you!

```python
from kirin.ir import dialect_group
from kirin.prelude import basic_no_opt
from kirin.rewrite import Fixpoint, Walk

@dialect_group(basic_no_opt.add(dialect)) # (1)!
def beer(self): # (2)!
    # some initialization if you need it
    def run_pass(mt): # (3)!
        Fixpoint(Walk(RandomWalkBranch())).rewrite(mt.code) # (4)!

    return run_pass # (5)!
```

1. The [`dialect_group`][kirin.ir.group.dialect_group] decorator specifies the dialect group that the `beer` dialect belongs to. In this case, instead of rebuilding the whole dialect group, we just add our `dialect` object to the [`basic_no_opt`][kirin.prelude.basic_no_opt] dialect group which provides all the basic Python semantics, such as math, function, closure, control flows, etc.
2. The `beer` function is the decorator that will be used to decorate the `main` function.
3. The `run_pass` function wraps all the passes that need to run on the input method. It optionally can take some arguments or keyword arguments that will be passed to the `beer` decorator.
4. Inside the `run_pass` function, we will traverse the entire IR and rewrite all the `ConditionalBranch` statements to `RandomBranch` statements until no more rewrites can be done.
5. Remember to return the `run_pass` function at the end of the `beer` function.

This is it!

## License

Apache License 2.0 with LLVM Exceptions

Commit message:

add picture in index example

docs/index.md, after:

# Kirin

Kirin is the **K**ernel **I**ntermediate **R**epresentation **In**frastructure. It is a compiler
infrastructure for building compilers for domain-specific languages (DSLs) that target
scientific computing kernels.

## Features

- MLIR-like dialects as composable python packages
- Generated Python frontend for your DSLs
- Pythonic API for building compiler passes
- Julia-like abstract interpretation framework
- Builtin support for interpretation
- Builtin support Python type system and type inference
- Type hinted via modern Python type hints (you get all the auto-completes as you expect!)

## Kirin's mission

Compiler toolchain for scientists. Scientists are building domain-specific languages (DSLs) for
scientific purposes. Most scientists do not have any compiler engineering background. On the other hand,
these DSLs are often high-level, and their instructions are usually slower than the low-level instructions
and thus result in smaller programs. No need to generate high quality LLVM IR/native binary most of the time!
So there are some chances to simplify terminologies, interfaces for the none-pros, while allowing good
interactivity and fast prototyping.

For the interested, please read the [Kirin's Mission](blog/2024/11/11/kirins-mission/) blog post for more details.

## Acknowledgement

While the mission and audience may be very different, Kirin has been deeply inspired by a few projects:

- [MLIR](https://mlir.llvm.org/), the concept of dialects and the way it is designed.
- [xDSL](https://github.com/xdslproject/xdsl), about how IR data structure & interpreter should be designed in Python.
- [Julia](https://julialang.org/), abstract interpretation, and certain design choices for scientific community.
- [JAX](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) and [numbda](https://numba.pydata.org/), the frontend syntax and the way it is designed.
- [Symbolics.jl](https://github.com/JuliaSymbolics/Symbolics.jl) and its predecessors, the design of rule-based rewriter.

## Quick Example: the `beer` language

In this example, we will mutate python's semantics to
support a small eDSL (embedded domain-specific language) called `beer`.
It describes the process of brewing beer and get drunk.

Before we start, let's take a look at what would our `beer` language look like:

```python
@beer
def main(x):
    beer = NewBeer("budlight") # (1)!
    Pour(beer, 12) # (2)!
    Drink(beer) # (3)!
    Puke() # (4)!
    if x > 1: # (5)!
        Drink(NewBeer("heineken")) # (6)!
    else:
        Drink(NewBeer("tsingdao")) # (7)!
    return x + 1 # (8)!
```

1. The `NewBeer` statement creates a new beer object with a given brand.
2. The `Pour` statement pours a beer object.
3. The `Drink` statement drinks a beer object.
4. The `Puke` statement pukes. Now we are drunk!
5. Instead of a normal `if else` branching statement, we execute the branches randomly because we are drunk.
6. The `Drink` statement drinks a `heineken` beer object for some possibility.
7. The `Drink` statement drinks a `tsingdao` beer object for some possibility.
8. Doing some math to get a result.

The beer language is wrapped with a decorator `@beer` to indicate that the function is written in the `beer` language instead of normal Python. (think about how would you program GPU kernels in Python, or how would you use `jax.jit` and `numba.jit` decorators).

You can run the `main` function as if it is a normal Python function.

```python
main(1)
```

or you can inspect the compile result via

```python
main.print()
```

![beer-printing](assets/beer-printing.png)

### Defining the dialect

First, let's define the [dialect](def.md#dialects) object, which is a registry for all
the objects modeling the semantics.

```python
from kirin import ir

dialect = ir.Dialect("beer")
```

### Defining the statements

Next, we want to define a runtime value `Beer` for the `beer` language so that we may use
later in our interpreter. This is just a standard Python `dataclass`.

```python
from dataclasses import dataclass

@dataclass
class Beer:
    brand: str
```

Now, we can define the `beer` language's [statements](def.md#statements).

```python
from kirin.decl import statement, info
from kirin.dialects.py import types

@statement(dialect=dialect)
class NewBeer(Statement):
    name = "new_beer" # (1)!
    traits = frozenset({ir.Pure()}) # (2)!
    brand: ir.SSAValue = info.argument(types.String) # (3)!
    result: ir.ResultValue = info.result(types.PyClass(Beer)) # (4)!
```

1. The `name` field specifies the name of the statement in the IR text format (e.g printing).
2. The `traits` field specifies the statement's traits, in this case, it is a
   [pure function](101.md/#what-is-purity) because each brand name uniquely identifies a
   beer object.
3. The `brand` field specifies the argument of the statement. It is a string value. The arguments
   of a [`Statement`](def.md#statements) must be [`ir.SSAValue`](def.md#ssa-values) objects with a
   field specifier `info.argument` that optionally specifies the type of the argument. The type used
   here is `types.String` which is not Python's type but a [`TypeAttribute`](def.md#attributes) object
   from the `py.types` dialect.
4. The `result` field specifies the result of the statement. Usually a statement only has one result
   value. The type of the result must be [`ir.ResultValue`](def.md#ssa-values) with a field specifier
    `info.result` that optionally specifies the type of the result.

the `NewBeer` statement creates a new beer object with a given brand. Thus
it takes a string as an argument and returns a `Beer` object. Click the plus sign above
to see the corresponding explanation.

```python
@statement(dialect=dialect)
class Drink(Statement):
    name = "drink"
    beverage: ir.SSAValue = info.argument(types.PyClass(Beer))
```

Similarly, we define `Drink` statement that takes a `Beer` object as an argument. The `types.PyClass` type
from `py.type` dialect understands Python classes and can take a Python class as an argument to create a
type attribute.

```python
@statement(dialect=dialect)
class Pour(Statement):
    name = "pour"
    beverage: ir.SSAValue = info.argument(types.PyClass(Beer))
    amount: ir.SSAValue = info.argument(types.Int)
```

The `Pour` statement takes a `Beer` object and an integer amount as arguments. The `types.Int` type is
from the `py.types` dialect. Now we can define a more complicated statement that involves control flow.

```python
@statement(dialect=dialect)
class RandomBranch(Statement):
    name = "random_br"
    traits = frozenset({IsTerminator()}) # (1)!
    cond: SSAValue = info.argument(types.Bool) # (2)!
    then_arguments: tuple[ir.SSAValue, ...] = info.argument() # (3)!
    else_arguments: tuple[ir.SSAValue, ...] = info.argument() # (4)!
    then_successor: ir.Block = info.block() # (5)!
    else_successor: ir.Block = info.block() # (6)!
```

1. The `traits` field specifies that this statement is a terminator. A terminator is a statement that
   ends a block. In this case, the `RandomBranch` statement is a terminator because it decides which
   block to go next.
2. The `cond` field specifies the condition of the branch. It is a boolean value.
3. The `then_arguments` field specifies the arguments that are passed to the `then_successor` block. Unlike
   previous examples, the `then_arguments` field is annotated with `tuple[ir.SSAValue, ...]`, which means
   it takes a tuple of `ir.SSAValue` objects (like what it means in a `dataclass`).
4. The `else_arguments` field specifies the arguments that are passed to the `else_successor` block.
5. The `then_successor` field specifies the block that the control flow goes to if the condition is true.
6. The `else_successor` field specifies the block that the control flow goes to if the condition is false.

the `RandomBranch` statement is a terminator that takes a boolean condition and two tuples of arguments. However,
unlike a normal `if else` branching statement, it does not execute the branches based on the condition. Instead,
it randomly chooses one of the branches to execute.

### Defining the interpreter

Now with the statements defined, we can define how to interpret them

```python
from kirin.interp import DialectInterpreter, Interpreter, ResultValue, Successor, impl

@dialect.register
class BeerInterpreter(DialectInterpreter):
    ...
```

the `BeerInterpreter` class is a subclass of `DialectInterpreter` that registers the implementation
of each implementation. The implementation is a method decorated with `@impl` that executes the
statement.

```python
    @impl(NewBeer)
    def new_beer(self, interp: Interpreter, stmt: NewBeer, values: tuple):
        return ResultValue(Beer(values[0]))

    @impl(Drink)
    def drink(self, interp: Interpreter, stmt: Drink, values: tuple):
        print(f"Drinking {values[0].brand}")
        return ResultValue()

    @impl(Pour)
    def pour(self, interp: Interpreter, stmt: Pour, values: tuple):
        print(f"Pouring {values[0].brand} {values[1]}")
        return ResultValue()

    @impl(Puke)
    def puke(self, interp: Interpreter, stmt: Puke, values: tuple):
        print("Puking!!!")
        return ResultValue()
```

Normally, most implementations are just straightforward like the above except that they will
do more meaningful things than printing. The [`ResultValue`][kirin.interp.ResultValue] object is
a result type of the interpreter that saying the return value is just a normal tuple of values.
This will be different when we implement interpretation for a terminator:

```python
    @impl(RandomBranch)
    def random_branch(self, interp: Interpreter, stmt: RandomBranch, values: tuple):
        frame = interp.state.current_frame()
        if randint(0, 1):
            return Successor(
                stmt.then_successor, *frame.get_values(stmt.then_arguments)
            )
        else:
            return Successor(
                stmt.else_successor, *frame.get_values(stmt.then_arguments)
            )
```

The `random_branch` implementation randomly chooses one of the branches to execute. The return value
is a [`Successor`][kirin.interp.Successor] object that specifies the next block to execute and the arguments
to pass to the block.

### Rewrite Python `if else` statement to `RandomBranch`

Now we can define a rewrite pass that rewrites Python `if else` statement to `RandomBranch` statement.
This is done by defining a subclass of [`RewriteRule`][kirin.rewrite.RewriteRule] and implementing the
`rewrite_Statement` method. The `RewriteRule` class is a standard Python visitor on Kirin's IR.

Here, we only need to implement the `rewrite_Statement` method to rewrite the `if else` statement to `RandomBranch`.

```python
from kirin.dialects import cf # (1)!
from kirin.rewrite import RewriteResult, RewriteRule # (2)!

@dataclass
class RewriteToRandomBranch(RewriteRule):

    def rewrite_Statement(self, node: ir.Statement) -> RewriteResult: # (3)!
        if not isinstance(node, cf.ConditionalBranch): # (4)!
            return RewriteResult()
        node.replace_by(
            RandomBranch(
                cond=node.cond,
                then_arguments=node.then_arguments,
                then_successor=node.then_successor,
                else_arguments=node.else_arguments,
                else_successor=node.else_successor,
            )
        )
        return RewriteResult(has_done_something=True) # (5)!
```

1. Import the control flow dialect `cf` which is what Python `if else` statement compiles to by default in the `basic` dialect group.
2. Import the `RewriteRule` class from the `rewrite` module.
3. This is the signature of `rewrite_Statement` method. Your IDE should hint you the type signature so you can auto-complete it.
4. Check if the statement is a `ConditionalBranch` statement. If it is not, return an empty `RewriteResult`.
5. Replace the `ConditionalBranch` statement with a `RandomBranch` statement and return a `RewriteResult` that indicates the rewrite has been done. Every statement has a [`replace_by`][kirin.ir.Statement.replace_by] method that replaces the statement with another statement.

### Putting everything together

Now we can put everything together and finally create the `beer` decorator, and
you do not need to figure out the complicated type hinting and decorator implementation
because Kirin will do it for you!

```python
from kirin.ir import dialect_group
from kirin.prelude import basic_no_opt
from kirin.rewrite import Fixpoint, Walk

@dialect_group(basic_no_opt.add(dialect)) # (1)!
def beer(self): # (2)!
    # some initialization if you need it
    def run_pass(mt): # (3)!
        Fixpoint(Walk(RandomWalkBranch())).rewrite(mt.code) # (4)!

    return run_pass # (5)!
```

1. The [`dialect_group`][kirin.ir.group.dialect_group] decorator specifies the dialect group that the `beer` dialect belongs to. In this case, instead of rebuilding the whole dialect group, we just add our `dialect` object to the [`basic_no_opt`][kirin.prelude.basic_no_opt] dialect group which provides all the basic Python semantics, such as math, function, closure, control flows, etc.
2. The `beer` function is the decorator that will be used to decorate the `main` function.
3. The `run_pass` function wraps all the passes that need to run on the input method. It optionally can take some arguments or keyword arguments that will be passed to the `beer` decorator.
4. Inside the `run_pass` function, we will traverse the entire IR and rewrite all the `ConditionalBranch` statements to `RandomBranch` statements until no more rewrites can be done.
5. Remember to return the `run_pass` function at the end of the `beer` function.

This is it!

## License

Apache License 2.0 with LLVM Exceptions
